# PhD Dissertation Analyses
R codes of statistical analyses of EEG data, behavioral and clinical measurements for my PhD dissertation in computational neuroscience.

# Dissertation Title
Electrophysiological Asymmetry in Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and Its Modulation by Effective Treatment

## Measurements
**Behavrioal:** stop-signal reaction time (SSRT), measured via the stop-signal task (SST). 
**Electrophysiological:** resting-state (RS) EEG (amplitude & asymmetry); SST event-related potentinal (ERP; amplitude & asymmetry);
spectral coherence; TMS-EEG - TMS-evoked potential (TEP) and inter-hemispheric signal propagation (ISP).
**Clinical:** total symptoms salce (normalized t-scores) of the Conners’ Adult ADHD Rating Scales Self-report Long-version (CAARS-S:L)
(see https://www.pearsonclinical.com.au/products/view/382).
Treatment outcomes: treatment-related changes (i.e., after vs. before treament) in SSRT (cognitive outcome) and CAARS total symptoms (clinical outcome).

## Treatmeent
ADHD participants underwent a 15-session high-frequency (18 Hz) rTMS treatment using either H-coil, Figure-8, or sham stimulation targeted at the right prefrontal cortex (rPFC). 

## Participants:
101 ADHD adults (75 males), aged 20-46 years (mean = 27.47; SD = 3.97), and 80 control participants (39 males), aged 21-38 years (mean = 25.87; SD = 3.26).
52 ADHD participants which enrolled in the multi-session TMS treatment were randomly assigned to recieve TMS treatment using an
H-coil, Figure-8, or Sham coil (n = 20, 16, 16, respectively).

## Analyses
1. Baseline Group comparisons (ADHD vs. control) - ANOVAs and compairsons
2. Baseline Relationships (between electrophysiological measures and SSRT, ADHD symptom severity, TEP and ISP) - pearson correlations and multiple regressions
2. Treatment Effects - ANOVAs and compairsons
3. Prediction of treatment outcomes - multiple regressions
4. Relationship to treatment outcomes - multiple regressions

## Regions of interest:
Frontal: FC2, FC4, F2 &F4 electrodes (used for baseline analysis)
Stimulation: F2 & F4 electrodes (used for treamtment analysis)

# Dissertation Abstract
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common neuropsychiatric disorder characterized by excessive inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity—either alone or in combination. While ADHD has been associated with a multitude of cognitive, neurobiological, and genetic factors, as well as with various electrophysiological abnormalities observed during resting-state and task performance, its precise etiology is currently unclear. This is especially true for adult ADHD, as most of the current literature is based on studies with children. One influential account of ADHD is the right-hemisphere account, which implicates a right-hemispheric deficit in this disorder and suggests that ADHD symptoms arise from the disruption of lateralized right-hemispheric processes. One such process is response inhibition—the ability to deliberately withhold a pre-potent, routine, or dominant response—which is compromised in ADHD and considered a core determinant of this disorder. Response inhibition is commonly investigated via the stop-signal task (SST), in which it is estimated as stop-signal reaction time (SSRT) and reflected in electroencephalogram (EEG) recording by the right-frontal N200 and by the central P300 event-related potential components. In recent years, the asymmetry account of ADHD has been proposed, suggesting that the observed right-hemispheric deficit in this condition is better explained by the ratio of activation between the two hemispheres, most prominently in frontal regions, rather than by the activation of the right hemisphere alone. However, as studies supporting this account have mainly focused on spontaneous Alpha-band oscillations, the role of asymmetry abnormalities in ADHD-related cognitive and clinical symptoms is yet to be understood. Furthermore, the underlying mechanism of asymmetry abnormalities in ADHD is currently not well understood. Relevantly, functional asymmetry has been indicated to be subserved by the transmission of inter-hemispheric inhibitory signaling from a strongly activated region in one hemisphere to the homologous region of the contralateral hemisphere through the corpus callosum, the structural integrity of which has been indicated to be compromised in ADHD.
The first objective of the current study was to examine the role of frontal electrophysiological asymmetry abnormalities in core clinical and cognitive symptoms of adult ADHD (i.e., symptom severity and response inhibition performance, respectively), and their underlying mechanism. To this end, we measured electrophysiological activity via EEG during resting-state and during performance of the SST in groups of ADHD and non-clinical control adults. Right-frontal and frontal asymmetry measures of spontaneous oscillatory activity, functional connectivity (evaluated as spectral coherence), and SST N200, as well as P300, were compared between the ADHD and control groups. We hypothesized that aberrant functional asymmetry in ADHD may be underlined by diminished cortical excitability or by compromised inhibitory inter-hemispheric connectivity, which were evaluated by the combination of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) with EEG recording as TMS-evoked potential (TEP) and inter-hemispheric signal propagation (ISP), respectively. Furthermore, we examined the relationship between electrophysiological measures and ADHD symptom severity, SSRT, TEP, and ISP. We found deficient response inhibition performance (indicated by SSRT) and processing (indicated by the N200 and P300 SST components) in the ADHD group. Moreover, we found that in the ADHD group, frontal asymmetry abnormalities were apparent during the performance of response inhibition, manifested as reduced SST N200 right-asymmetry, but not during resting-state. In the ADHD but not the control group, N200 right-asymmetry was found to be positively related to response inhibition performance and to right-frontal excitability (indicated by TEP magnitude), which was abnormally weaker than in controls. Abnormally diminished inhibitory inter-hemispheric connectivity (indicated by stronger ISP) was also observed in the ADHD group.
The second objective of this study was to investigate the modulation of the abovementioned electrophysiological patterns following a multi-session repetitive TMS (rTMS) treatment, and its relationship with the treatment’s effect on core clinical and cognitive symptoms of ADHD. To this end, the ADHD participants underwent a 15-session high-frequency (18 Hz) rTMS treatment using either H-coil, Figure-8, or sham stimulation targeted at the right prefrontal cortex (rPFC). Measurements were taken again after the treatment and compared to baseline. We found that the rTMS treatment using the H-coil effectively alleviated ADHD symptoms and reduced Alpha-band right-frontal and frontal inter-hemispheric functional connectivity. In contrast, we did not find a clinical effect for a similar treatment involving the Figure-8 coil, which induces a shallower and more focal stimulation than the H-coil. Additionally, we examined the predictive power of baseline measurements for observed clinical and cognitive treatment outcomes, as well as their relationship with treatment-related modulation of electrophysiological patterns. The clinical efficacy of the H-coil treatment was positively predicted by baseline spontaneous low-frequency frontal left-asymmetry, and was indicated to be underlined by an increase in right-frontal Alpha-band functional connectivity. Finally, a treatment-related increase in right-fontal excitability was positively related to improvement in response inhibition performance in the H-coil group only. 
We conclude that: (1) frontal asymmetry abnormalities in adult ADHD are only apparent during the performance of a task specifically relevant to its pathology, not during resting-state; (2) aberrant response-inhibition-related asymmetry in adult ADHD is underlined by reduced excitability of the right-frontal cortex; (3) a multi-session, high-frequency rTMS treatment targeting the rPFC can effectively alleviate adult ADHD symptoms, but requires a deeper and broader stimulation to that induced by a Figure-8 coil, as induced by the H-coil; and (4) H-coil rTMS treatment is more effective for individuals who are less characterized by abnormal resting-state frontal leftwards asymmetry at baseline, and its clinical effect is subserved by an induced increase in right-frontal Alpha-band functional connectivity. Importantly, the present study provides support for the asymmetry account for ADHD and indicates that it can better explain a core deficit in response inhibition in ADHD adults than the right-hemisphere account.
